# 1. Build an Asteroids Game

We're going to build a simple video game, based on the classic Asteroids. If you've never played before, you can take a look at this (slightly different from our) version of the game.

Prerequisites
Python 3.10+ installed (see the bookbot project for help if you don't already have it)
uv project and package manager
Access to a unix-like shell (e.g. zsh or bash)
Learning Goals
The learning goals of this project are:

Introduce you to multi-file Python projects
Show you a real-world use case for object-oriented programming
To have a ton of fun building a rewarding project!
The goal is not to teach game development or the math required for physics simulations. As a result, there are some places where you will simply copy-paste code that we wrote for you. Don't worry about trying to understand every detail if it's not interesting to you, you will be asked to write the parts that matter most.

Assignment
To get started, make sure you have the Boot.dev CLI installed and working.

Run and submit the CLI tests.

The tests just ensure that the CLI is installed and configured correctly.

# 2. Installation

We are going to be using pygame and a virtual environment to develop our game.

Pygame
Pygame is a module for developing games using Python. It provides simple functions and methods for us to easily draw images within a GUI window and handle user input.

Virtual Environment (venv)
Virtual environments are Python's way to keep dependencies (e.g. the pygame module) separate from other projects on our machine. For example, we need pygame version 2 for this project, but another project on your computer might require version 1.

As a best practice, each Python project on your machine should have its own virtual environment to keep them isolated from each other.

Assignment
Create a new uv project on your computer.
uv init your-project-name
cd your-project-name

Create a virtual environment at the top level of your project directory:
uv venv

Activate the virtual environment:
source .venv/bin/activate

You should see (your-project-name) at the beginning of your terminal prompt, for example, mine is:

(Asteroids) wagslane@MacBook-Pro-2 Asteroids %

Make sure that your virtual environment is activated when running the game or using the bootdev CLI.
Add the pygame library as a project dependency:
uv add pygame==2.6.1

This tells Python that this project requires pygame version 2.6.1.

Make sure pygame is installed:
uv run -m pygame

This will result in an error (the test expects an exit code of 1), but the output will show that pygame is installed.

Run and submit the CLI tests.

# 3. Pygame

Now that we have pygame installed, let's write just a bit of boilerplate code so that we have a runnable program to build on.

Assignment
Open main.py. It should've been created when you ran uv init.
On the first line, import pygame:

# this allows us to use code from

# the open-source pygame library

# throughout this file

import pygame

Modify the main function to print "Starting Asteroids!" (use this exact text).
Keep this code at the end of the file:

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()

This line ensures the main() function is only called when this file is run directly; it won't run if it's imported as a module. It's considered the "pythonic" way to structure an executable program in Python. Technically, the program will work fine by just calling main(), but you might get an angry letter from Guido van Rossum if you don't.

Run the program with uv run main.py
